---
---
title: Wolf Packs
tags: 
    - dogs
    - wolf
---
<h2> Why everything you know about wolf packs is wrong </h2>

The alpha wolf is a figure that looms large in our imagination. The notion 
of a supreme pack leader who fought his way to dominance and reigns 
superior to the other wolves in his pack informs both our fiction and is 
how many people understand wolf behavior. But the alpha wolf doesn't exist
—at least not in the wild. </br>

Although the notions of "alpha wolf" and "alpha dog" seem thoroughly 
ingrained in our language, the idea of the alpha comes from Rudolph 
Schenkel, an animal behaviorist who, in 1947, published the then-
groundbreaking paper "Expressions Studies on Wolves." During the 1930s and 
1940s, Schenkel studied captive wolves in Switzerland's Zoo Basel, 
attempting to identify a "sociology of the wolf." </br>

In his research, Schenkel identified two primary wolves in a pack: a male 
"lead wolf" and a female "bitch." He described them as "first in the pack 
group." He also noted "violent rivalries" between individual members of the 
packs:

*A bitch and a dog as top animals carry through their rank order and as 
single individuals of the society, they form a pair. Between them there is 
no question of status and argument concerning rank, even though small 
fictions of another type (jealousy) are not uncommon. By incessant control 
and repression of all types of competition (within the same sex), both of 
these "α animals" defend their social position.*
</br> 

Thus, the alpha wolf was born. Throughout his paper, Schenkel also draws 
frequent parallels between wolves and domestic dogs, often following his 
conclusions with anecdotes about our household canines. The implication is 
clear: wolves live in packs in which individual members vie for dominance 
and dogs, their domestic brethren, must be very similar indeed.</br>

A key problem with Schenkel's wolf studies is that, while they represented 
the first close study of wolves, they didn't involve any study of wolves in 
the wild. Schenkel studied two packs of wolves living in captivity, but his 
studies remained the primary resource on wolf behavior for decades. Later 
researchers, would perform their own studies on captive wolves, and 
published similar findings on dominance-subordinant and leader-follower 
relationships within captive wolf packs. And the notion of the "alpha wolf" 
was reinforced, in large part, by wildlife biologist L. David Mech's 1970 
book The Wolf: The Ecology and Behavior of an Endangered Species (I'm 
linking it here, but please note that while the book has historical 
interest, some of its research is outmoded).</br> 

Mech spent several years during the 1960s studying wolves in Michigan's 
Isle Royale National Park as part of his PhD thesis work. Mech's book 
echoed Schenkel's notions of "alpha wolves" and competition-based pack 
hierarchies. Readers of Mech's book were led to believe that dominance 
played a key role in the lupine social order, and that wolves were 
naturally inclined to dominate one another. And Mech's book became a hit; 
it was republished in paperback in 1981 and remains in print (much to 
Mech's chagrin) to this day. It popularized a lot of our modern ideas about 
wolves, including competition-based hierarchies. Although Mech has since 
renounced the notion of the "alpha wolf," he admits that if you've heard 
the term, it's likely thanks to his book. </br>

In more recent years, animal behaviorists, including Mech, have spent more 
and more time studying wolves in the wild, and the behaviors they have 
observed has been different from those observed by Schenkel and other 
watchers of zoo-bound wolves. In 1999, Mech's paper "Alpha Status, 
Dominance, and Division of Labor in Wolf Packs" was published in the 
Canadian Journal of Zoology. The paper is considered by many to be a 
turning point in understanding the structure of wolf packs. </br> 

"The concept of the alpha wolf as a "top dog" ruling a group of similar-
aged compatriots," Mech writes in the 1999 paper, "is particularly 
misleading." Mech notes that earlier papers, such as M.W. Fox's "Socio-
ecological implications of individual differences in wolf litters: a 
developmental and evolutionary perspective," published in Behaviour in 
1971, examined the potential of individual cubs to become alphas, implying 
that the wolves would someday live in packs in which some would become 
alphas and others would be subordinate pack members. However, Mech 
explains, his studies of wild wolves have found that wolves live in 
families: two parents along with their younger cubs. Wolves do not have an 
innate sense of rank; they are not born leaders or born followers. The 
"alphas" are simply what we would call in any other social group "parents." 
The offspring follow the parents as naturally as they would in any other 
species. No one has "won" a role as leader of the pack; the parents may 
assert dominance over the offspring by virtue of being the parents. </br> 

While the captive wolf studies saw unrelated adults living together in 
captivity, related, rather than unrelated, wolves travel together in the 
wild. Younger wolves do not overthrow the "alpha" to become the leader of 
the pack; as wolf pups grow older, they are dispersed from their parents' 
packs, pair off with other dispersed wolves, have pups, and thus form packs 
of their owns. </br> 

This doesn't mean that wolves don't display social dominance, however. When 
a recent piece purporting to dispel the "myth" of canine dominance appeared 
on Psychology Today, ethologist Marc Bekoff quickly stepped in. Wolves (and 
other animals, including humans), display social dominance, he notes; it 
just isn't always easy to boil dominant behavior down to simple 
explanations. Dominant behavior and dominance relationships can be highly 
situational, and can vary greatly from individual to individual even within 
the same species. It's not the entire concept of wolves displaying social 
dominance that was dispelled, just the simple hierarchical pack structure. 
In response to the same piece, Mech pointed to a 2010 article he published 
detailing his observance of an adult gray wolf repeatedly pinning and 
straddling a male pack mate over the course of six and a half minutes. "We 
interpreted this behavior as an extreme example of an adult wolf harassing 
a maturing offspring, perhaps in prelude to the offspring's dispersal." 

</br> 


As research on wolves, both captive and wild, continues, we develop a more 
complex, nuanced picture of wolf behavior. But the easy notion of the 
"alpha wolf" still persists. Certainly in entertainment it has made for 
some nice stories; plenty of books and movies center around the notion of 
wolf—and werewolf—ranks. However, the outmoded idea of the "alpha wolf" 
still has some legs in a real-world area: dog training. </br> 


Just as, more than six decades ago, Schenkel extrapolated his wolf studies 
and applied them to domestic dogs, so too have many carried the notion of 
the "alpha wolf" over to dog training. Certainly, just as parent wolves 
hold dominance over their cubs and human parents hold dominance over their 
children, owners hold dominance over their dogs. Until my pup gets himself 
a credit card and a pair of opposable thumbs (and stops dissolving into 
delighted wiggles every time I tell him what a good little man he is), I'm 
pretty much the boss in our relationship. But some trainers take the idea 
of pack rank to the extreme; dog owners are given a laundry list of rules 
of how to maintain alpha status in all aspects of their relationship: Don't 
let your dog walk through the door before you do. Don't let her win a game 
of tug. Don't let him eat before you do. Some (famous) trainers even 
encourage acts of physical dominance that can be dangerous for lay people 
to execute. Much of this is a legacy of those old wolf studies, suggesting 
that we're in constant competition with our dogs for that pack leader 
position. </br> 


But, you might ask, mightn't domestic dogs behave much like wolves in 
captivity? Despite being members of the same species, wolves (even human-
reared wolves) are behaviorally distinct from domestic dogs, especially 
when it comes to human beings. Take the famous experiment in which human-
socialized wolves and domestic dogs are both presented with a cage with 
food inside. The food is placed inside a cage in a way that makes it 
impossible for either wolf or dog to retrieve it. The wolves will 
inevitably keep working at the cage, trying to puzzle out a way to remove 
the food. The dogs, after a few seconds of struggle, will look to a human 
as if to say, "Hey, buddy, a little help here?" Even if the hierarchical 
ranks were some innate part of lupine psychology, dogs have behaviors all 
their own. </br> 


Canine ethology is actually a very rich area of study. Researchers like 
Karen B. London and Alexandra Horowitz constantly contribute to our 
understanding of the domestic dog, and researchers like Mech (who has an 
updated book, Wolves: Behavior, Ecology, and Conservation) continue to 
expand our knowledge of wild wolves. And perhaps someday, our popular 
culture will more closely resemble our modern behavioral science rather 
than the results of outdated research. </br> 

</br> 
</br> 

Source: 

https://io9.gizmodo.com/why-everything-you-know-about-wolf-packs-is-wrong-502754629?fbclid=IwAR1GgLFJyCSDV_PCGqyu-TEsUH8Ltl3nfBirAtt8Ls_R7ydOuzAalNu9tmk

